the brain sends signals to the gut
microbes changes their behavior their
function and then these metabolites you
know that that we know they probably go
back to the brain and reinforce it and
create this this vicious cycle of brain
gut microbial interactions that I
presenting underlies chronic depression
everybody welcome to health theory
you're here because you believe that
human potential is nearly limitless but
you know that your ability to actually
actuate your potential is at least
partially based on your physical body as
such both of us are here to learn and my
obsession is with helping people
optimize their minds and my goal with
this show is to introduce you to the
people and ideas that will help you do
just that I'm Tom Billie co-founder of
quest nutrition and impact theory and
today we're joined by dr. Emma and Mayer
he's a UCLA professor brain gut
microbiome expert gastroenterologist
neuroscientist and Amazon best-selling
author of the mind gut connection in my
quest to solve my wife's digestive
issues I came across his book and I was
totally blown away and wanted to bring
him on to see what more I could learn so
without further ado dr. Emerich
Mayer thank you so much for joining us
okay nice to - absolute pleasure to have
you here as I was telling you off camera
sincerely my journey to help my wife get
into a better place has been massively
impacted by your book which i think is
really incredible and by way of primer
for people how exactly does the gut
influence our overall well-being well I
mean writing this book has been a new
experience for me I've been a scientist
on studying the communication between
the brain and the gut for most of my
career the concept is that multiple
parts of our body interact with each
other in the brain sits over them like
this supercomputer that makes sure the
interactions are okay and if everything
works in harmony we also feel good as a
as a by-product so you're not you know
evolution didn't really select that we
feel good it's
but evolution selected all our systems
so they work perfectly and when they
work perfectly you know we have a sense
of well-being so my wife Lisa just about
got almost two and a half years ago now
started saying I don't feel well and
then started vomiting like really badly
and so we thought she had the stomach
flu and couldn't eat when she first had
everything upset her stomach and by
stomach I mean gut and then in trying to
like figure this all out we realized
that she had lost diversity in her
microbiome and so okay how do we rebuild
from that and a very long process we
tried a lot of things but the one that
like when we when we were advised to do
it just did not seem possible that it
could be useful and then I've heard you
talk a lot about it was she was advised
not to eat if she was stressed and to do
like almost a meditative eating to
breathe in a meditative fashion while
she ate why on earth would that matter
well I mean the answer that is actually
fairly simple so when you imagine that
the brain and the gut are connected and
have always been connected you know
millions of years in evolution this has
always been a tight-knit unit that if an
organism is if a person is stressed it
will send down signals to the gut it
will change a lot of things so this so
called autonomic nervous system can
change the transit time the peristaltic
activity in different parts of the GI
tract in different ways so it's stress
will slow down the stomach but speed up
the intestine severe stress can lead to
this very powerful contractions
secretion of fluid secretion of it's
called antimicrobial peptides mucus so
you have to imagine that when you
stressed your gut is different
completely different from when you're
not stressed so when you're when you're
relaxed so this is not only the effects
the gut but it also affects the microbes
because it's their home so at that
environment that they live in and they
thrive on if that all sudden is changed
or is chronically changed in this way
the main problem I mean if you stress
No for five minutes because you were
almost hit by a car you know that that's
not a big deal really it's in terms of
that balance but if you're chronically
stressed you have a chronically altered
composition of you got so now when you
eat something it it doesn't feel right
you get symptoms you get bloating get
cramps it triggers these reflexes in the
gut - you know - for things to move
through faster could result in diarrhea
and one thing you've likened it to which
I thought was really helpful for
somebody that's just sort of starting to
wrap their head around this is you said
we have facial expressions when we're
angry when we're scared and if you think
of those states as being something
internal that's now represented by the
muscles in the face those same internal
states can be represented in a similar
fashion by the gut and that if you get
them in a state that is their version of
the angry face or the scared face or
whatever that they're actually like you
just said they're producing different
metabolites and things like that which
can have a pretty profound effect and
that that image for me of thinking of my
gut States as being as reactive as my
facial reactions and are they is
reactive like that as fast as the face
can respond in my poo Coulson mentioned
this these observations by by physicians
in during war times you know when they
had somebody had like a fistula there's
something they could actually see their
intestines moving and blood flow so they
noticed when somebody walked in and that
that's wounded soldier got upset
instantaneously saw changes in the
contraction and in the blood flow so
this but what I said earlier you know if
you if that happens every once in a
while it's very not such a big deal if
if it happens chronically it will
rearrange the whole habitat an
ecological system in in in in your gut
and so you know before I always know
that negative emotions are never good
for anything really so the Buddhist
principle is that there's no good bad
emotion
and so they but they clearly affect your
health I mean it's not just that you
feel bad you know it's but I would say
you know it's it's many parts of the
body that reacts to emotions like your
heart rate and the difference is the gut
is the most complex system that's
affected by this and the gut has the
microbes the heart doesn't have that you
your blood vessels don't have that any
emotions it's not such a new thing that
is the physical representation of your
emotions just as like in your face and
your muscles the impact on the overall
organism is much greater because you
know you have the system sitting there
with the trillions and microbes that all
little chemical factories you have
you're the biggest part of your immune
system the biggest part of your hormonal
system it's all sitting there and when
these signals go down from the gut it
changes the whole interaction one thing
that I really want people to understand
that I was blown away by in your book
and I mean it's right there in the title
so maybe I shouldn't have been as sort
of awestruck by it as I was but that
there's a feedback loop going both
directions so the gut is is as you've
called it and I'm sure as it's called in
your field the Forgotten organ right so
that if you took all the microbiota in
your body and condensed it down which we
can't even see it so the fact that once
you condense it down you realize just
how big it is about the size of a liver
no I'm not mistaken which makes it one
of the largest organs in your body if
you were to flatten it out it's bigger
than a basketball court
yeah so it's this massive sensing organ
which I never realized it actually has
the ability to taste though not it's the
same receptors that we have on our
tongue has ability to smell and so it's
it's taking in all these cues that it's
reading from the food and then it's
speaking back to the brain and then the
brain is speaking back to it and that
through the millions of years of
evolution it's gotten really good at
communicating with us it's a big system
but it's not the one that generates your
emotions it's it's the system that
completely takes care of you got
activity and your daily
option so anything that you do within
food ingestion this system can handle
unless you get stressed or emotionally
upset about something then the big brain
interferes with that a lot of people
when they're stressed they don't feel it
women feel it more likely than men do
when there's a change in that gain in
that sensitivity then all of a sudden
patients develop all kinds of symptoms
you know from from fullness bloating
abdominal distension intolerance a
certain food items
is that why IBS was originally
considered a psychosomatic problem you
know some psychosomatic you know I mean
today we call it mind-body medicine but
the psychosomatic medicine movement was
had had a wrong basic concept that that
all these diseases were brain for brain
diseases now we look at them as you know
the brain got microbiome disturbances or
alterations in the balances so one of
the things pretty why you know many of
these stress-related disorders become
chronic because that system that
normally keeps things in balance is
altered and accepts a difference
different steady-state a different
stability state and once it has this new
stability state it's it's stuck in that
and it becomes chronic in it so
basically it'll change its set point so
it's if you're first starting to get
stressed it tries to get back to a
neutral set point but if you're always
stressed always trust always dress that
basically becomes a new normal
absolutely what is the function of that
so this this terrifies me as somebody
who has a wife with microbiome issues
that once you get it out of whack like
it's hard but if you manage to get it
out of whack and it's got its new
setpoint how do you get it built back up
and I read something terrifying which
basically said if you look at us as the
species over time there's this like
stair-step declination of diversity in
the microbiome and so if you know you're
let's say your great-grandparents were
here your grandparents were here your
parents were here but you're here if in
your life uux
variance of decline you can get it back
up to where you started but as far as I
can tell from what I've read nobody
thinks you can get it back to where your
great-grandparents were why you
understand that why can't I just take a
probiotic yeah so this is this is a big
issue right now you know so there was a
recent papers I'm from this a population
that that can do it so the hot star in
in East Africa and Tanzania Rift Valley
so these are some of the last remaining
hunter-gatherers I think it's only a
couple of hundred left that live that
lifestyle and their microbiota their
microbiome diversity has a seasonal
variation so they found it they did if
they test them in summer and winter and
what what's different in summer and
winter with these people is they they
switch from a more plant-based diet to a
more meat based diet
their microbiome changes with these
dietary changes when you look at them at
the state when they don't have their
high plant intake it looks like ours
almost the same miss is the same species
in the same types of microbes then when
they go to the plant-based diet it
regains its diversity so they still have
the ability to go from from our level
back up to the high level there's
thousands of species that do not are not
that essential and you can lose them but
if you lose one of those keystone
species and the whole system gets
altered so it's it's possible would
happen in Western society in developing
countries that we lost some of these
keystone species and so no longer have
this ability to to to return I think
it's gonna be one of the biggest
challenges really - yeah and so and that
if I can't do it through probiotics
could I
and I've actually seriously I put a date
that if my wife wasn't better by and
thankfully she is sort of beyond the
critical threshold now but if she hadn't
gotten better by X date I was gonna take
her somewhere to get a fecal transplant
is that a possibility like is that a way
to at the moment the answer is No so
there's many ongoing studies now
clinical trials with fecal microbial
transplants in so as you know this
one condition were what works perfectly
it's the best the best treatment in this
one all you normal microbes are wiped
out is C difficile colitis it's to get
this some people get this when they
receive antibiotics in the in the
hospital see what's really well but you
have to remember that in in that
situation the normal microbiome has been
wiped out pretty much so you start from
scratch all the other conditions were
it's been tried like inflammatory bowel
disease and irritable bowel syndrome and
autism spectrum disorder you have an
alter microbiome but it it's it's it's
an another stable state you know it has
assumed another ecological stability
state and it's it's very difficult to
push it away from that there are studies
going on were people get repeated and up
cautious courses of antibiotics and then
fecal microbial transplant like in you
know an autism spectrum disorders that's
been tried and the hypothesis there was
that the microbiome is playing a role in
autism yeah which is somewhat
questionable
I mean autism starts really in in in
utero you know the abnormal growth of
the brain so if anything I think it's
potentially the microbiome in the
metabolites of the mother did affect the
child's brain development and so that's
kind of my theory about this but a lot
of disparate parents are doing these
these transplants themselves then our
our diet is clearly another thing you
know the more plant-based fiber eat
greater diversity of your microbiome is
and this is sort of what this whole
concept of you know the the plant-based
diet comes in that the metabolites that
these microbes produce the more you feed
them what they have evolved for in
evolution to break down these complex
fiber components of plants the more you
feed on that the larger the number will
get and the more of these healthy
metabolites civil you know they will
produce and it's
kind of interesting to me on one side
from a gut microbial diversity gut
health standpoint it's it would seem
very easy to say what's what's the best
diet for people but but then clearly we
have others you know like in IBS it's
like this fodmap diet which actually
takes out a lot of the fiber these
oligosaccharides we have the ketogenic
diet you know which obviously is
wonderful to lose weight and if you have
diabetes - - you know get get your
hemoglobin a1c down but but there's
certainly not what the microbes for
their health and diversity like you know
so right I mean just sum the whole thing
up I think we're beginning now to
understand that there are situations
were the diversity can oscillate
depending what we eat let me ask you
what's the role of the gut in depression
and anxiety it's it's very interesting I
mean there's studies going on and you
know we would plan again of often this
were large-scale studies was a dietary
intervention like you know a
Mediterranean type diet and negative in
600 people you know where you look at
the brain in the microbiome before and
after that dietary intervention
particularly the focus on cognitive
performance the cognitive decline and my
guess is that over time there's this
different influence now the ketogenic
diet I find still find that puzzling you
know there so a lot of people say oh
it's when they started this I completely
felt different the brain fog was gone
it's in some ways paradoxical because
it's not the good thing for your
microbes necessarily but that's the
situation where people report eyes they
immediately felt better or different so
I've used a ketogenic diet very
extensively in my own life and then my
wife has used it in her recovery as well
and so I'll walk you through what each
of this experienced so my experience is
not with a lifting of brain fog or
anything like that but a profound
difference in the way that I respond to
hunger so if I'm on a high-protein diet
I'm never high carb I haven't been high
carb in more than 10 years so my average
daily carb intake is probably less than
30 grams and entirely from vegetables so
what I see is when I get hungry from
high protein I have a declination of
performance I'm not able to concentrate
I get slightly irritable maybe I get a
headache I certainly don't want to
concentrate like if you're gonna give me
that there's any willpower component to
this my willpower is way low when I get
hungry on a high-protein diet because
I'm burning glucose now my wife's
experience has been the
anti-inflammatory effects because she is
often self-reported that
her gut feels swollen she doesn't know
how else to explain it she's like it
just feels swollen so at you know she
eats something and it's going through
her system and it just feels irritated
and inflamed and when she does a
ketogenic diet that is significantly
reduced
however she'll still have bouts of what
sound like typical IBS symptoms right
she'll she'll have diarrhea shelf
cramping bloating pain like all of it
and be like what just triggered that I
was doing perfectly for let's say four
days and now all of a sudden eating the
same thing all the sudden she has like
some big episode so clearly not a silver
bullet for her but has been a big part
of what we do to maintain her
inflammation is yes so I mean I would
say you know now with with this gut
microbiome science I think there will be
a whole revisiting of of dietary
recommendations even though initially
was a skeptic of the ketogenic diet but
I mean you have to listen to you to to
people I mean in some ways it tells you
more than then then the mouse
experiments you know so if people feel
better obviously there must be a reason
why that is the case I think nutrition
and diet is just entering a phase of a
real scientific rigor now which didn't
have an in the past and that's largely
driven by the interest in the microbes
because you want to understand what the
microbes do you know they live off what
we eat so it's it's gonna be essential
to
- you know - to sort this out so really
fast going back to depression and
anxiety the the question that I most
want to ask you why on earth is 95% of
the serotonin which i think of I mean
you know SSRIs right selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor which is used for
depression which is all about the brain
why is 95 percent of serotonin stored in
the gut and what does it mean because
you you say it's stored but I don't
remember you following up on like what
does it mean to be stored versus used is
95 percent used in the gut or like what
what is serotonins role in all this
it's it's a story in in in in progress
you know I mean I wish I could give you
the answer I ask myself the same
question why why would you know
evolution design us in a way that that
molecule that plays such an important
role in and sleep and well-being and
pain sensitivity what what did all this
be at the gut level and is it
manufactured in the gut and stored in
the gut or manufactured elsewhere and
stored it know it know it is manufacture
in the gut so is hormone tryptophan
hydroxylase from dietary tryptophan
that's that's taken up by these cells
and interestingly so we now know last
couple uses come out that this enzyme
that that converts tryptophan into
serotonin is to large degree under the
influence of microbial signals so that
the microbes can actually you know
influence how much serotonin that you
synthesize that you produce and
ultimately also how much is being
released when they are stimulated by
microbial signals or by contractions of
the carter baizen food product the
serotonin is being released on the
synapse and single sends a signal
through the vagus nerve into your brain
into emotional regulation centers of the
brain so that's freedom at the main
communication pathway between the
serotonins
that the micro of certain signals and
and you know brain function and
emotional function you know so for
example TV the diet
tryptophan and people have taken
tryptophan supplements which really
should be good for you in some ways
because the microbes if they seem more
tryptophan they send more signals to
these serotonin cells that produce
serotonin so you would have a very
simple antidepressant initially think
that's yeah that's the answer you know
like there's a change in that microbial
enter endocrine cell communication and
that says somehow plays a role in
depression and and and anxiety
unfortunately it's not that it's not
that simple
I think depression probably starts at
the brains is some vulnerability then
it's becomes manifests during periods of
stress or trauma the brain sends signals
to the gut microbes changes their
behavior their function and then these
metabolites you know that that we know
they probably go back to the brain and
reinforce it and create this this
vicious cycle of brain gut microbiome
interactions that I processing underlies
chronic depression and I've heard you
say that you think meditation may
actually play a role on that like what
what's your belief about mechanistically
what's going on like why would
meditation help our hypothesis was that
meditation changes the the activity of
your autonomic nervous system that
signals back to the gut clearly if
you're in a state of relaxation or
mindfulness will be less sympathetic or
less stress signals going to the God
that changes the microbes and
metabolites and then that would in some
ways you know break that that that that
cycles but we did another study with
with cognitive behavioral therapy in
patients with with irritable bowel
syndrome and as we had anticipated you
know patients - quite well so about 60%
response rates on that with his
cognitive behavioral therapy the only
thing that we found is which is
interesting that you got microbial
composition when you start out to
therapy
in some ways predicts if you're gonna
respond to it or not wow I've never
heard that before so you're saying that
you could sequence the microbiome and
say either you have a set up that
matches people that have gotten a lot of
benefit out of this or you haven't and
potentially do you know what volume is
doing in terms of sequencing yeah
actually
I'm I mean shoot this cause I'm on the
scientific advisory board as a company
and if you do that volume test it could
end EF suffering from IBS it could
predict you know if you're gonna respond
to to what type of therapy diet or mind
base or or medications I mean that
technology and that approach I think has
has the potential to really break the
current paradigm and at the current
practice of medicine
yeah I'm really intrigued to see what
Big Data is able to pull out of this
especially with that hypothesis that you
just put forward which should be
perfectly answered by that if we can see
set States and then they have predictive
abilities in terms of outcomes then if
we can use big data to really work back
what actually is the causative rather
than just the correlative element of
that'd be really fascinating all right I
want to do a segment now called gut
check nice and clever and I give us the
top whatever number to three things that
are going on right now either at the
individual person level or at a societal
level that have massive gut health
implications that people may or may not
be aware of the food industry has played
a big role in providing us with
nutrition that's not good for us of all
the processed foods and a high sugar and
high fat and so there's a pending I mean
an ongoing paradigm shift as well so
many of the CEOs of these companies have
realized that a the consumer habits are
changing there's some very visionary
CEOs of some of these big companies it
have in mind the benefit of the consumer
not not the benefit of the shareholder
so I think that's a
very exciting thing and the change in
the in the in the food that we eat and
the awareness of people and the response
now of the people that produce these
foods I think that's that's clearly a
you know big thing I think the the
antibiotic use in terms of a negative
example I think that's still unabated I
think that yeah you know some pretty
dramatic changes will have to will have
to happen for this to really
fundamentally change it in in ob/gyn in
pediatrics and adult treatment these
people would recommend antibiotic
treatment for IBS which I personally
think is in some ways crazy in a time
where we all know that you know we don't
want to harm the microbes so to give
repeated doses of antibiotics for which
keeps you a marginal benefit transient
benefit I think is really irresponsible
well I mean I would say the third thing
is that there are now a massive effort
to see how that the microbiome the
wisdom that's in that system how they
can be utilized to both for Diagnostics
but also for personalized medicine it's
conceivable that during that test it has
more predictive value or diagnostic
value than doing your annual physical
and you - Wow your regular blood test
potentially you know it's in a different
stages of life so if you do this on a
pregnant mother it could predict the
risk for autism may if you do it and an
infant you predict how this infant later
will you know if there's a high risk of
developing depression or and you know
did this potential clearly has been
recognized by people I get at why am i
you volume or they to someone is this
many players now not sure who's gonna
win that race but it's is it there's a
huge potential this could revolutionize
medicine yeah so we've leveraged volume
very heavily so we happen to know Naveen
personally he's been on the show impact
Theory a couple times great dude really
like him yes and so he's allowed us to
access the backend and work with some of
the people that they have and the thing
that is has been so terrifying and the
thing that I'm pushing him that is the
problem he has to solve is that the
massive complexity so for instance what
we realized was lisa has SIBO but she
also has a deficiency in the variability
the variety of species that she has in
her gut she also has diminished lining
of her gut and probably has some gut
leak so it's like okay you can't attack
them all at once so there's no one
simple solution that's gonna solve
everything and if you took the
antibiotics for SIBO which like you were
saying is the traditional recommendation
well the problem is now you're gonna
exacerbate all the other problems that
she has lower down in the line so
working on these like one at a time
right okay so first we have to address
SIBO and what do you have to do to do
that that's already insanely complicated
to tie this up with one thing that I
just could not wrap this interview
without talking about it's something you
introduced me to I'd never heard of this
before and while I think you mean it
specifically in reference to the brain
as an analogy I think it works for the
complexity that I'm talking about which
is the brain connectome what is the
brain connectome what does it mean and
maybe most interestingly what is the
paradigm that it totally shatters the
brain connectome project is something
that's been initiated by the National
Institute of Health and it's it's based
on the idea that seems like obvious that
every cell in in the brain is connected
with each other and that there's there's
networks of the brain that are connected
with each other and it's like a massive
supercomputer really the way it's
organized and there are people that you
know with fiber tracking and with brain
imaging different modalities of and
imaging that study this phenomenon and
ultimately we'll be able to get a much
more accurate this
option of the functions of our brain
which it's still pretty primitive the
way it is right now you know and the
impact will be
I mean clearly there's a race on in
understanding the brain and its
potential and its role in disease and so
for example that whole idea that the
brain is is it's not just a cognitive
machine and emotional machine but its
primary function probably being the
supercomputer that surveys every cell in
your body constantly in a millisecond
millisecond time scale and monitors for
potential threats to its home it to the
homeostasis of the organism and then
responds you know based on its memory
its experience but but also based on on
on inborn patterns to overcome that
perturbation so understanding how the
brain does that this regulatory role I
think will also revolutionize medicine I
mean it's as you said earlier you know
medicine until I mean even today 95% of
medicine does not take the brain into
account in inhale Center which is crazy
it's the most powerful machine you know
in the well certainly on this planet
that you would not take this into
account in your theories of how the body
functions and it's really amazing to me
but but that is changing I mean so the
the connectome project is one of those
areas that is really pushing ahead and
and will will establish the the correct
role of the brain and you know in our
physiology and our health I love that
notion of of a connectome of being far
more interrelated and I think that's the
the thing that was the big breakthrough
for me it's far more interrelated than
our metaphors and our analogies up to
this point would lead us to believe
which is the exact issue that we're
having with digestion right you've
talked about people have historically
thought about it as this machine kind of
like a car and it's like if you take
care of it and give it the right fuel
it'll last about 75 years and you know
with having to address the occasional
infection or whatever but
but not understanding the role that
communication plays that there's the as
you said the bi-directional
communication of the brain to the gut
that gut to the brain that so much of
our immune system is housed in the gut
right and oh man when I read this in
your book I almost flipped out that the
reason that so much of our immune system
is in our gut is because of its
encountering potentially deadly bacteria
in the food that we eat yeah and I
thought oh like it was one of those that
should be patently obvious but never
made my radar until I read it and I
think what you're working on is is so
critically important in this moment I
because it's affected my life I know
just how important and I worry that Lisa
and I are sort of the the tip of a spear
of what's coming which is really
terrifying if we don't get a lot more
answers I think there's going to be an
immeasurable amount of suffering and
yeah so getting some of these answers is
incredibly important in your book has
really been a touchstone for that all
right before I ask my last question
where can these guys find you online my
personal website Imran Myers calm that
guides you then to all the other areas
all right my final question and this
admittedly is meant to be hard because I
want to force you into a binary
situation where you can only choose one
thing what one thing could people do
additively or subtractive lee
reductively I guess to have the biggest
impact on their overall health and
well-being yeah so with the one thing
that's makes it difficult I would you
know I already start with the exercise
part but right after that or at the same
level the diet part I did not see that
answer coming I'll be honest
really yeah well the exercise diet yes
exercise now the exercise part is
because you know there's so many studies
the benefits on cognitive function and
the slowing the the cognitive decline
and
stress reduction and change structural
change in the brain so I disappointed
you with the exercise but now I love
that being surprised is the best
possible answer yeah that's awesome dr.
Maier thank you so much for coming
straight real pleasure guys if you
haven't already discovered him out in
the wide world if you haven't read the
book if you haven't gone to his Facebook
page his website Instagram page go check
it all out he's really somebody that is
that the absolute forefront of
discovering this and what I love about
him and what I think is is just so
apparent in the talk that we had today
is he's not dogmatic he's really trying
to discover the answers he has a deeply
inquisitive mind and something that we
didn't get to talk about in the
interview he was meant to take over a
chocolate business which was in the
family for generations and he left that
because he had a deep passion for his
inquisitiveness around the subjects that
we talked about today and that shines
through in everything that he does and
you get the sense of somebody really
trying to discover the truth and that to
me is what the show is all about we are
going to succeed or fail based on our
ability to really look at a lot of
different hypothesis and build a
worldview based on that rather than
presenting dogma
so just incredibly grateful for you
coming on the show today it was really
really amazing guys dive into his world
I think that the connection between the
mind and the gut is just absolutely and
critical and you've got to figure that
that one out for yourself for sure if
you want to be able to optimize your
mind and live the best life possible so
thank you guys so much for joining us
today and if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary
take care
[Music]